Add SQL commenter as context propagation for databases (#2495)
open-telemetry/semantic-conventions: docs/database/database-spans.md

MAY specify a different `db.query.summary` format as long as produced summary remains
relatively short and its cardinality remains low comparing to the `db.query.text`.

## Context propagation

**Status**: [Development][DocumentStatus]

### SQL commenter

> Instrumentations MAY propagate context using [SQL commenter](https://google.github.io/sqlcommenter/spec/) by injecting comments into SQL queries before execution. Context injection SHOULD NOT be enabled by default, but instrumentation MAY allow users to opt into it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instrumentations MAY propagate context using [SQL commenter](https://google.github.io/sqlcommenter/spec/) by injecting comments into SQL queries before execution. Context propagation SHOULD NOT be enabled by default, but instrumentation MAY allow users to opt into it.
```

> The instrumentation implementation MAY choose to either **append** the comment to the end of the query or **prepend** the comment at the beginning of the query, depending on the specific database system's requirements or preferences.

Reviewer 2: Can we prepend by default to avoid truncation? Discussed [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/pull/2236#discussion_r2078566667).

> The instrumentation implementation MAY choose to either **append** the comment to the end of the query or **prepend** the comment at the beginning of the query, depending on the specific database system's requirements or preferences.

Author: I feel it is a never-ending discussion. Maybe we should leave it to the instrumentation author's preference. Could we not define a default one for now?

The instrumentation SHOULD allow users to pass a list of propagators to overwrite the default propagators.

> The instrumentation MAY provide the following propagators that users can use to overwrite the default propagators:

Reviewer 3: There is a chance that I missed something, but it is not obvious what are `default propagators` here.

Reviewer: I guess the global propagator as usual

> The instrumentation MAY provide the following propagators that users can use to overwrite the default propagators:

Author: Discussion about using a generic propagator to push a list of string key-values. https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/pull/2495#discussion_r2209133620

> - `service.name` propagator, a propagator that can inject the `service.name` into carrier.

Reviewer 4: Super small nit:

```suggestion
- `service.name` propagator, a propagator that can inject the `service.name` resource attribute into carrier.
```

> - `service.name` propagator, a propagator that can inject the `service.name` resource attribute into carrier.

Author: > some contrib component

I wonder how could that work in the real world implementation, as a instrumentation itself could already be a contrib component.

Did you mean we need to specify a `service.name` propagator in language contrib, like https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go-contrib?

> - `service.name` propagator, a propagator that can inject the `service.name` resource attribute into carrier.

Author: I have split the definition of the `service-name` propagator to another section, and instrumentation does not need to care about this detail.

It would be the language SDK contrib's concern to implement such a propagator, just like the AWS propagator. For instance, in Go, we have [aws x-ray propagator](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go-contrib/blob/main/propagators/aws/xray/propagator.go) in contrib.

Context: https://cloud-native.slack.com/archives/C041APFBYQP/p1752514146312029?thread_ts=1752509024.937119&cid=C041APFBYQP

> - `service.name` propagator, a propagator that can inject the `service.name` resource attribute into carrier.

Author: I have moved the custom propagator out of this PR, so we can focus on the SQL commenter itself without any add-ons.

MAY specify a different `db.query.summary` format as long as produced summary remains
relatively short and its cardinality remains low comparing to the `db.query.text`.

## Context propagation

**Status**: [Development][DocumentStatus]

### SQL commenter

Instrumentations MAY propagate context using [SQL commenter](https://google.github.io/sqlcommenter/spec/) by injecting comments into SQL queries before execution. Context propagation SHOULD NOT be enabled by default, but instrumentation MAY allow users to opt into it.

> The instrumentation implementation SHOULD **append** the comment to the end of the query. Semantic conventions for individual database systems MAY specify different format depending on the specific database system's requirements or preferences. For instance, the instrumentation MAY **prepend** the comment at the beginning of the query.

Author: From https://google.github.io/sqlcommenter/spec/, it says

> The final comment SHOULD be affixed to the final SQL statement in the format
> ```
> <SQL STATEMENT> /*<ATTRIBUTE_KEY_VALUE_PAIRS>*/
> ```

Which means appending.

The instrumentation SHOULD allow users to pass a propagator to overwrite the global propagator.

If the propagator does not provide any value, the instrumentation SHOULD NOT inject any comment into the query.

**Examples:**

- For a query `SELECT * FROM songs` with W3C TraceContext propagator:

  ```sql
  SELECT * FROM songs /*traceparent='00-4bf92f3577b34da6a3ce929d0e0e4736-00f067aa0ba902b7-01',tracestate='congo%3Dt61rcWkgMzE%2Crojo%3D00f067aa0ba902b7'*/

>   ```

Author: Updated on https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/pull/2495/commits/b9aabc88d7a401adc9d92ca25174bc8367fe443f

## Context propagation

**Status**: [Development][DocumentStatus]

### SQL commenter

Instrumentations MAY propagate context using [SQL commenter](https://google.github.io/sqlcommenter/spec/) by injecting comments into SQL queries before execution. Context propagation SHOULD NOT be enabled by default, but instrumentation MAY allow users to opt into it.

The instrumentation implementation SHOULD **append** the comment to the end of the query. Semantic conventions for individual database systems MAY specify different format depending on the specific database system's requirements or preferences. For instance, the instrumentation MAY **prepend** the comment at the beginning of the query.

The instrumentation SHOULD allow users to pass a propagator to overwrite the global propagator.

If the propagator does not provide any value, the instrumentation SHOULD NOT inject any comment into the query.

**Examples:**

- For a query `SELECT * FROM songs` with W3C TraceContext propagator:

  ```sql
  SELECT * FROM songs /*traceparent='00-4bf92f3577b34da6a3ce929d0e0e4736-00f067aa0ba902b7-01',tracestate='congo%3Dt61rcWkgMzE%2Crojo%3D00f067aa0ba902b7'*/
  ```

>   Note that adding high cardinality comments, like `traceparent` and `tracestate`, to queries can impact the performance for some database systems, like MySQL. See [this related issue](https://github.com/google/sqlcommenter/issues/284) for more details.

Reviewer 2: Severely affected databases are Oracle and SQL Server for both prepared and non-prepared statements.

>   Note that adding high cardinality comments, like `traceparent` and `tracestate`, to queries can impact the performance for some database systems, like MySQL. See [this related issue](https://github.com/google/sqlcommenter/issues/284) for more details.

Author: Updated on https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/pull/2495/commits/f6f5994392edbc4c213f83397e01f877fa544d8e

MAY specify a different `db.query.summary` format as long as produced summary remains
relatively short and its cardinality remains low comparing to the `db.query.text`.

## Context propagation

**Status**: [Development][DocumentStatus]

### SQL commenter

Instrumentations MAY propagate context using [SQL commenter](https://google.github.io/sqlcommenter/spec/) by injecting comments into SQL queries before execution. Context propagation SHOULD NOT be enabled by default, but instrumentation MAY allow users to opt into it.

The instrumentation implementation SHOULD **append** the comment to the end of the query. Semantic conventions for individual database systems MAY specify different format depending on the specific database system's requirements or preferences. For instance, the instrumentation MAY **prepend** the comment at the beginning of the query.

> The instrumentation SHOULD allow users to pass a propagator to overwrite the global propagator.

Reviewer 5: FWIW, there's some prior art in Java Instrumentation of pairing a specific instrumentation to a specific propagator:

https://github.com/search?q=repo%3Aopen-telemetry%2Fopentelemetry-java-instrumentation%20AwsXrayPropagator.getInstance()&type=code

Maybe it's ok to pair this behavior directly to the w3c propagator (only supporting w3c trace context)?

Author: Do you mean that instead of using the global propagator by default, we should use the `W3C propagator` as the default one?

I don't have a preference here. What makes the `W3C propagator` the default, a better choice than the global propagator?

Reviewer 5: Good point

> If the propagator does not provide any value, the instrumentation SHOULD NOT inject any comment into the query.

Author: This prevents injecting empty comments like `/**/` when the propagator sets nothing.

> If the propagator does not provide any value, the instrumentation SHOULD NOT inject any comment into the query.

Reviewer 6: Perhaps you meant something like this then

```suggestion
If the context is empty or invalid, the propagator SHOULD NOT inject any comment into the query.
```

? 

But this sentence immediately follows "The instrumentation SHOULD allow users to pass a propagator to overwrite the global propagator.", it seems it intends to talk about propagator not being provided by the user.

> If the propagator does not provide any value, the instrumentation SHOULD NOT inject any comment into the query.

Author: We can use this code as the example. In this example, even the propagator provides nothing, the comments will be injected.

https://github.com/XSAM/otelsql/blob/370716b2f8c317607879035937ba65cfc751dc5a/commenter.go#L66

```
return fmt.Sprintf("%s /*%s*/", query, cc.Marshal())
```

Since it is instrumentation's job to actually inject the comment, the instrumentation should be the one to be regulated for this, not the propagator.

> If the propagator does not provide any value, the instrumentation SHOULD NOT inject any comment into the query.

Author: @lmolkova Is this good now?

> If the propagator does not provide any value, the instrumentation SHOULD NOT inject any comment into the query.

Reviewer 6: sorry, I still don't get it - propagator injects the context, not the instrumentation. Propagators check if the context is valid before attempting to inject it. So I'd still suggest to change to remove this sentence or change it to.

```diff
- If the propagator produces no output (empty context), the instrumentation SHOULD NOT inject an empty comment into the query.
+ Propagator SHOULD NOT inject invalid/empty context.
```

> If the propagator does not provide any value, the instrumentation SHOULD NOT inject any comment into the query.

Author: @lmolkova Let me elaborate on this. The propagator injects data from the context to the carrier during the `inject` call. This is the method we will use during the SQL comments injection. And, **the propagator does not inject any context during this.**

After the data is transferred to the carrier, the instrumentation can use the data from the carrier to inject comments into SQL. During this injection, the instrumentation might just use a simple approach to put carrier data in a string `/* <carrier-data> */`. When the `<carrier-data>` is empty, then we get `/* */`, which is not ideal, as empty comments do not have meaningful meaning. The ideal output of this is that the instrumentation should skip the SQL injection under such a situation and leave the SQL untouched.

I think I can just update this sentence to this.

```
The instrumentation SHOULD NOT inject an empty comment into the query.
```

This does not mention the propagator. I hope this can reduce the confusion.

> If the propagator does not provide any value, the instrumentation SHOULD NOT inject any comment into the query.

Reviewer 6: The standard propagator behavior is to actually inject things. 

E.g. if you look at [HTTP go](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go-contrib/blob/bdba5c83b829a938a76d41aed6ef47427cbe1f47/instrumentation/net/http/otelhttp/transport.go#L129) - there is no additional step that copies the carrier over. It's very surprising to ask instrumentation to actually serialize carrier.

Converting it to sql commenter, I would expect the setter to take care of `fmt.Sprintf("%s /*%s*/", query, cc.Marshal())` or a special SQL commenter propagator to do it, but not ask all the instrumentations to do it.

The instrumentation implementation MAY choose to either **append** the comment to the end of the query or **prepend** the comment at the beginning of the query. Semantic conventions for individual database systems MAY specify different format depending on the specific database system's requirements or preferences.

The instrumentation SHOULD allow users to pass a propagator to overwrite the global propagator.

If the propagator does not provide any value, the instrumentation SHOULD NOT inject any comment into the query.

**Examples:**

- For a query `SELECT * FROM songs` with W3C TraceContext propagator:

  ```sql
  SELECT * FROM songs /*traceparent='00-4bf92f3577b34da6a3ce929d0e0e4736-00f067aa0ba902b7-01',tracestate='congo%3Dt61rcWkgMzE%2Crojo%3D00f067aa0ba902b7'*/
  ```

### `service-name` propagator

The `service-name` propagator is a propagator that can inject the `service.name` resource attribute into carrier.

SDK contrib MAY provide this propagator for databases context propagation.

> The `service-name` propagator need to be manually configured by the user to know the `service.name` value if OpenTelemetry does not have a way to automatically fetch the `service.name` value.

Reviewer 7: I don't think users should need to configure the service name, since there are many sources it can come from (environment, declarative config, manually configured SDK, ...) - and, if it's just a user-provided value then there is no guarantee that it's the same value as `service.name` as defined in resource attributes.
Likewise, SDK contrib shouldn't try to guess the service name for the same reason. It's tedious and error-prone to duplicate checking different possible sources of `service.name` in the correct order.

I don't think that the resource attributes are exposed in any spec-approved way. It seems to me that if `service.name` is accepted as a valid value for context propagation, then there should be an agreed way to retrieve it. A couple of options could be:
- add `service.name` to [SpanContext](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.46.0/specification/overview.md#spancontext)
- add `TracerProvider.GetResource` or `TracerProvider.GetServiceName`.

What about `service.namespace` and `service.version`, since `service.name` might not be uniquely identifying by itself?

Author: > I don't think users should need to configure the service name, since there are many sources it can come from

That means the propagator needs to access the OTel SDK. But, it should be ok if this propagator lives in the contrib.

However, this is not a guarantee that it is the same value as `service.name`, as users might have a different way to retrieve their own `service.name` instead of using some automatic discoveries. And, I don't think you could include every automatic discovery in a propagator. The easiest way (when there is no entity provider API) might be ask users.

> if it's just a user-provided value then there is no guarantee that it's the same value as service.name as defined in resource attributes.

Users are responsible for providing the correct value.

> What about service.namespace and service.version, since service.name might not be uniquely identifying by itself?

Good question. I feel we might need a generic propagator to inject. Maybe a `attribute` propagator that can inject a list of attributes?

> then there should be an agreed way to retrieve it.

We could probably let the `attribute` propagator retrieve the user-defined key list from the carrier to make it more legitimate.

Author: I have moved the custom propagator out of this PR, so we can focus on the SQL commenter itself without any add-ons.

I will create another PR introducing the Attributes (or TextAttributes) propagator after aligning with the spec SIG.
